[THEME MUSIC]
>> My name's Gregg Braden.
And I'd like to welcome you to
this very special presentation
of "Missing Links: The Deep
Truth of Our Origin, History,
Destiny, and Fate."
Now last episode, we
discovered that the key
to the thinking that will guide
us through our time of extremes
is found in the timeless
wisdom that our ancestors asked
themselves in their time and
that science is asking today.
The question is simply
this who are we?
Well new discoveries
are changing our answer.
And as they do, they're
changing the way
we think of ourselves
and the world.
Today, let's zero in on
some of those discoveries
and what they mean in our lives.
When I was in school back
in the 1960s and '70s,
I was taught that the
fundamental essence of matter
looked like this.
It looks like an atom.
And the atom was
a mechanical atom.
It was little things
moving around the thing.
Electrons moving
around the nucleus.
Well, today, the
atom no longer looks
like little things moving around
the thing, it looks like this.
There are fields within
fields within field,
pulsing fields of energy.
This is one of the
ways that our thinking
has changed very, very quickly.
We now know that
everything is energy.
everything is connected.
We now know that when we
look into the universe,
for example, that the stars
that we're seeing that
appear to be separate
from one another
aren't really separate at all.
In this image that
you're seeing,
this is from the
Hubble Space Telescope.
It is an optical telescope.
It looks at the
universe much the way
you and I would look
through our eyes.
And when it sees the
stars and the galaxies,
it sees them as separate
from one another optically.
Now I'm going to share
with you another image
from another telescope.
The image that you're
seeing right now
is from the Chandra
Space Telescope.
It is not an optical
telescope, it senses energy.
We're looking at the
same place in space,
but look how
different this looks.
All of a sudden, those
stars and galaxies,
they're no longer
separate from one another.
They're all connected.
And one of the things I
find really fascinating
about this connection is that
we have a sense that it's almost
like a net or a web.
Interestingly enough,
our indigenous ancestors
have always told us that we
live in the web of creation.
In the Hopi tradition,
for example,
when Spider Grandmother first
emerged into this world,
she wove the web of creation
so that her children
could live their lives.
Or in the Hindu traditions,
the great god Indra
wove the web of creation
at the intersection.
At each place in the web, Indra
put a glittering jewel of light
that became the
planets and the stars
that we see in our night sky.
So these ways of thinking,
they're not scientific.
But these are the ways
that our ancestors
made sense of what they
saw in their world.
And this is where much of what
science is revealing today
parallels those traditions.
We definitely are seeing
a web-like presence.
When we think about
one another, we've
been taught that we're
separate from one another,
that we're separate from
the world around us.
And that what we
do in our bodies,
in our thoughts,
feelings, and emotions
has very little
influence on anything
beyond our own
physical body, if that.
But the new discoveries
are telling us
that's not true at all.
The new discoveries
are showing us
that we are deeply connected.
And in some ways, the connection
arises from fields of energy
that we've only
begun to understand
in the late part of the 20th
and now the early 21st century.
The heart for example, we now
know around every human heart
there is a field of energy.
Now this is a field
that we can measure
with conventional equipment.
You can go to the hardware store
and build your own detector
if you know what
you're looking for.
So this energy, it's not the
prana, it's not the aura,
it's not the chakra.
It may be related to the prana
and the aura and the chakra,
but it is an
electromagnetic field
of energy shaped like a donut.
It's called the tube torus.
And it extends between
five and eight feet
from every human
heart around us.
When I asked the
researchers who were working
with these fields-- I know
that these fields are very
powerful-- and I said,
why would they only
extend to five to eight feet?
And the researchers said,
Gregg, it's a good question.
They said the five
to the eight feet,
that is the limitation of the
equipment doing the measuring.
They said in all
probability, the field
that extends around
every human heart
is probably an infinite
field on the quantum level.
An infinite field from our
hearts extending into creation.
And that means that what we
create in that heart field
is broadcast, and in
some ways influences,
the world around us.
And that's the beauty
of understanding
the science that parallels
these ancient traditions.
We interact with
one another everyday
through these heart fields.
And new discoveries
are telling us this.
The new discoveries
are telling us
a lot about, not only our
everyday lives, but our past.
We've been conditioned to
believe, for example, that we
as humans are the product of
an evolutionary process that
began long ago and has gone
through many iterations leading
to where we find
ourselves today.
That's what we've been taught.
We've been steeped in
a story that tells us
that evolution is our story.
However, the new
science, the best science
of the 21st century,
is now telling us,
while evolution is a fact
for some forms of life,
that the theory breaks down
when it comes to humans.
Something else is happening.
So all of these
discoveries that I
am sharing with you
right now, they're
all examples of where
new discoveries are
in fact changing the story of
the way we answer the question,
who am I?
We know that we are
connected and not separate.
energetic beings
and that we influence the world
around us through that energy.
So what I'd like to
do right now is zero
in on one place in
this conversation.
To zero in on one
of these places
where we're taught to
think about our past
in the way that no
longer works and that
is with civilization itself.
And I was in school back
in the '60s and '70s,
I think many of you
when you were in school,
or if you have young
people in school today,
we have been taught.
We've been steeped in the
belief that civilization
began about 5,000, maybe 5,500
years ago with ancient Sumeria.
And from that
point in time there
has been a linear progression
to the point where we are today.
And we're taught that we are the
most sophisticated civilization
that has ever graced
the face of the earth.
The problem is the data
doesn't support that story.
The data doesn't
support the story.
So what you're seeing
on this screen right now
is you're seeing an image
of the line of history,
the timeline of
history, that was being
used when I was in school.
And I asked my
history professor,
I said what happened
to the left of Sumeria?
What happened before
that 5,500 years?
And I remember my professor said
to me something very powerful.
It triggered
something within me.
He said don't worry about
anything to the left.
He said that's not important.
He said history
began, civilization
began, 5,000 years ago.
And I said what?
I said you mean we don't know
what happened before that?
I said that's the place for me.
That's where I want to be.
That's where I want to look.
And I have spent much of
my adult life exploring
the new archaeological
discoveries that are now
overturning these ideas of
history and civilization
and where we began.
So if you will look to this
chart, what you're seeing
is the timeline of
what we have been
led to believe-- you see
ancient Sumeria, ancient Egypt,
and everything, the Maya, the
Inca, the Aztec, the Olmec,
the Toltec, everything
is more recent than that.
Greece and Rome, as
old as they feel to us,
they are all more recent.
I have personally had
the opportunity now
to document some of the new
discoveries that are telling us
that civilization
is much, much older.
For example, what
you're seeing right now,
this is an image of
me in 2010 documenting
a new site in northern Peru.
And this site is rocking
the world of history,
of archeology, because
it is now documented
to be the single
oldest technologically
advanced civilization in
all of the Americas in all
the Americas.
It's older than the
Inca, than the Aztec,
than the Olmec, and the Toltec.
It's older than
anything in Mexico,
older than anything
in North America.
It is called Caral.
Caral.
C-A-R-A-L. Caral, Peru.
And Caral is a mystery
to us, because we've
been taught that civilization
began 5,000 years ago.
Interestingly, that's
when this one ended.
Caral collapsed 5,000 years ago.
And what the dating
now is showing
us is that thrived for
2,000 years before that.
That's 7,000 years ago.
So if this were the only
place where the data does not
fit the traditional story, maybe
we could call it an anomaly.
But what's happening
is there are
so many anomalies that
scientists and historians have
set aside.
And they said, well, you
know these archaeological
discoveries don't fit our story.
We'll come back and
look at them later.
Now there are so
many discoveries
to come back and look at
that the discoveries are
telling a new story.
And that new story is what
we're talking about right here.
Caral was a technologically
advanced civilization.
It is about 150 acres.
So it's a large site.
Five pyramids, three
circular plazas--
like the one you're seeing
in the image right now--
and a tremendous amount of
information in a nonwritten
form.
So they weren't using
writing, but they
were using symbols and geometry
to tell us that they understood
the cosmos.
And they understood their
relationship to the cosmos.
The astronomical markers
that remain in Caral
today are indicating
relationships
that were not even known
in the Western world
until the 20th century.
Yet this was 7,000 years ago.
How did they know?
Where did they get
their information?
So when we think about
Caral, that confirmed date
7,000 years, it's old.
But it's not the oldest.
Now I know there has
been a lot of controversy
around the discoveries
that have been
made in Egypt over the years.
And I've worked with some
of the researchers who
have done beautiful work on
pushing against the mainstream
history and the
mainstream classrooms
and the mainstream textbooks
that tell us about what really
happened in Egypt.
And specifically, one of the
best preserved places in Egypt
is the Giza Plateau.
This is where we find the Great
Pyramid as well as the Sphinx.
Well as a geologist--
I'm a degreed geologist--
and I've been
fascinated by what has
happened with the
Sphinx for this reason.
The traditional dating of
the Sphinx has been about
4,400-4,500 years
before present.
So we're told that that is
when the great pharaohs built
this structure.
The problem has always been
that the Sphinx is constructed
of material, of rock, that is
in situ, in other words that
are not made of blocks that were
brought in from another place,
it was carved out of the natural
rock out of the Mother Earth.
And because of that, what
we find on that rock,
we know happened in that place.
It didn't happen somewhere else.
Well here's where this
gets really interesting.
The erosion that we
see on the shoulders
and on the back of
the Sphinx, we've
been told for years that it was
from wind, high amounts of wind
over long periods of time,
that's called Aeolian erosion.
Well when geologists from Boston
University and specifically,
Robert Schoch, when
he went in and began
examining these erosion
marks, what he found,
as a geologist-- he's
actually a stratigrapher
and a paleontologist, I believe
are the two terms that he uses
to describe his expertise-- what
he found is that the erosion is
actually not made from wind.
It's made from water.
It's not Aeolian.
It's called fluvial erosion
made from tremendous amounts
of water moving quickly
over long periods of time.
That's where the
story of the Sphinx
gets really interesting
because there has not
been vast amounts of
water moving quickly
over long periods of time
for a very, very long time.
But the scientists, Robert
Schoch, and his team, this
was their conclusion.
They published this in peer
reviewed geologic journals.
And the interesting thing was
that geologists said, sure,
it's obvious.
We have no problem with this
conclusion, the geologists.
The historians have a terrible
problem with the conclusion,
because the conclusion says the
last time that kind of water
was moving through Egypt
where the Great Sphinx is
is between 8,000 and
12,000 years ago.
Now that messes up
all the history books.
However, that is what the
science is showing us.
8,000 to 12,000
years ago, the Sphinx
would have already had to been
in place, which means maybe it
was built even before that, for
the water to begin the erosion.
In his own words, I just
want to share with you
the words of Robert Schoch.
He said, quote "I
came to the conclusion
that the oldest portions
of the Great Sphinx
must date back to an earlier
period, at least 7,000 years
and maybe as early
as 9,000 years ago,
to a time when the
climate was very different
and included more rain."
So what we're talking
about are anomalies
in the archaeological
record as we
have been asked to embrace
that record in the past.
We're looking at evidence
of advanced technological
civilizations during
a time, we were told,
only primitive mud huts
in primitive societies
were existing.
Now there so many
of these anomalies
that we can take the time
to explore, right now,
but I'd like to
cut to the chase.
I want to spend a
little bit of time
on the oldest technologically
advanced civilization
that science has now
agreed is a technologically
advanced civilization.
And they've agreed
upon the dates.
It's a very mysterious site.
It's located in southern Turkey
near the Syrian border, which
makes it a very difficult
place for archeologists
to get into right now because of
the war that's happening there.
It is called Gobekli
Tepe, Gobekli Tepe.
And it is a site that
has been on the radar
of some archeologists
for some time.
Now I'm mentioning this
because in the last episode,
we talked about the false
assumptions of science
with the inverted pyramid.
One of those false
assumptions was the assumption
that civilization
began 5,000 years ago.
This is important because
when we ask ourselves
who am I as an individual,
who are we collectively,
and we look at where
we've come from,
we've been conditioned
to think in that box
to go back only 5,000 years.
Well let me share with you what
a profound and limiting effect
that can have on a
scientist who adheres
to this kind of thinking.
In the 1960s, there was
an American archaeologist.
He heard from villagers
about this site, Gobekli Tepe
and they took him there.
And he found some
pottery on a hill.
And he began dating
this pottery.
And the dates for the
pottery came back so old
that the scientist said
they can't be right
because civilization is
only 5,000 years old.
That is what we've
all agreed upon.
So even though the pottery
told him something older
was happening, he made
a professional choice.
He walked away from this site
because he said it cannot
possibly be as old as what
the dates are now revealing.
Well it wasn't until the 1990s
that German archaeologist
returned to this site.
He did the same dating.
The difference is
he was not bound
by the rigidity of the
scientific thinking.
He wasn't in that box.
And he believed the dates.
And he very famously
said, publicly,
and he said to his
crew, to his team,
he said if I don't walk away
from this site right now,
he said I will spend the rest
of my life excavating this site.
And that is precisely what
he did until he passed
just a couple of years ago.
So what is Gobekli Tepe?
It's a mysterious site.
It is believed to be a
series of circular temples
that are buried under the earth.
Apparently they were
intentionally buried.
And I say it is believed,
because they are still buried.
Scientists are using
Earth imaging radar, earth
penetrating radar, to
look into the earth
and see these temples.
Right now, there are, I
believe, five to eight
that have been unexcavated.
They are circular temples
of vertical columns.
Scientists don't know
who put them there,
why they were there, why they
were intentionally buried.
But the fact that they
were has preserved
what has been found
to such a degree
that the hieroglyphs look
like they were made yesterday.
Some of the most
magnificent images
of what these hieroglyphs
are all about.
Some of the hieroglyphs
are very mysterious
and are now being
linked directly
to constellations
and star systems that
were not even acknowledged
until the 20th century.
So once again, we're
saying how did they know?
How did these people know?
Well one of the things that
I find really intriguing
about Gobekli Tepe is the
remains, the artifacts,
that have been found there.
And there have been a
series of images of humans
that are anatomically correct.
And everything is done really
well with one exception.
None of them have a mouth.
The mouth on every one
of these is nonexistent.
Scientists don't
know what that means.
I don't know what that means.
We've never seen anything
like that before.
And because it is so consistent
throughout the Gobekli Tepe
site, we have to think that it
has some meaning that actually
will benefit us in helping to
understand the site itself.
So we're looking at a
series of circular temples,
underground, buried
intentionally.
This is where it gets
even more interesting.
The burial of the sites
happened about 8,000 years ago.
So remember we're taught
that civilization's
only 5,000 years old.
This site was buried
8,000 years ago.
But the dating now is
pushing its origin back far
beyond that.
The scientific dating for
Gobekli Tepe as it stands right
now, is between 11,300-11,500
years before present.
It's over twice as old as
what you and I were taught
when we were in
school and what we're
teaching our young
people in the classrooms
and from the textbooks today.
11,300-11,500.
Now if we begin plugging
in some of these dates
from what are called
the anomalous sites
on the traditional
timeline-- I'm
going to do this on your
screen so you can see it-- what
we see-- here is Caral in Peru.
There is Gobekli Tepe.
There is the Great Sphinx.
There are other sites--
Catalhoyuk, for example,
another site in Turkey.
Or the Gulf of Khambhat in
India, a fascinating site
just off the shore
the Indian continent
underneath 120 feet of water.
So scientists say
either this site
was built under water
intentionally-- which
isn't likely but you have
to say that as a scientist--
or it once was above
water and became submerged
when the sea levels rose.
Well that brings up
a problem for history
because the sea levels rose
at the end of the last Ice Age
when the ice melted and the
water raised the sea levels.
That was 12,000 years ago.
So the Gulf of Khambhat, a very
mysterious site, it is huge.
It is five miles long.
It's three miles wide.
And scientists now very, very
interested in excavating this.
The problem is it's
all under water
and it adds to the complexity.
So I'm just mentioning
it so you can
see it's not just about Caral.
It's not just Gobekli
Tepe, or the Sphinx,
but there are many
sites now that
don't fit this historic model.
As a geologist, I'd like to see
what's happening on the Earth
when the civilizations
are happening in the way
that they are.
So what I'm doing is
I'm drawing for you now,
on the chart, the
blue shaded box.
That is the last Ice Age.
And it ended about
12,000 years ago.
Gobekli Tepe, being
dated to 11,500 years,
that is the date that
scientists have now.
However, they have
yet to excavate
to the bottom of the site.
So they believe that when they
get to the bottom of Gobekli
Tepe, we're going to be
looking at around a 13,000
year old archaeological site.
That pushes it into
the last Ice Age.
We are now talking about
a technologically advanced
civilization dating back
into the last Ice Age.
So what I'd like to call
your attention to is
when you look at the chart,
I'm drawing the red lines
that represent the 5,000 year
cycles that we talked about
in an earlier episode.
These are 5,000 year cycles.
They were known by
Mesoamerican traditions--
the Aztek, the Maya, the Inca.
These are the 5,000
year cycles that
were the focus of
the 2012 phenomenon
in the Mayan calendar.
So on the chart,
what you're seeing,
the red line to the right, that
is the most recent 5,000 year
cycle completion.
That was 2012.
So as you go to the left,
you see when it began.
And interestingly,
when that cycle
began the space
between the beginning
and the end of this
5,000 year cycle
encompasses everything
that we have been taught
about the history of the world.
What we have been
led to believe is
the history of the
whole world forever
is actually only the history
within the most recent 5,000
year cycle.
There was another one before
that, another one before that,
another one before that.
And what scientists
are also finding
is that it is that
these 5,000 year cycles
when the climate changes.
And that climate change
is very, very similar
to the climate change that
we're seeing right now.
It may be the trigger for the
beginning of some civilizations
and the end for others.
As the climate changes,
the way our ancestors
grew their food changed.
And they had to find new ways
to take care of themselves
and to feed the
large populations
for some of these sites.
So now what we're
looking at is we're
looking at civilization
in 5,000 year cycles
rather than a linear event
that happened once and evolved
into the sophisticated
state that we see today.
We're looking at the beginning
and the end and the beginning
and the end of technologically
advanced civilizations
in the past.
This opens the door to
a lot of possibilities.
One of the questions,
for example,
when scientists look at some
of the most magnificent temples
remaining on the earth today,
Machu Picchu, for example,
or if they look at the Giza
Plateau and the Great Pyramid
and the Great Sphinx, or they
look at Gobekli Tepe or they
look at Caral, and they look
at what these people knew,
the cosmological knowledge,
the astronomical knowledge,
the ability to calculate cycles.
And they say, where did
this knowledge come from?
The understanding of these
cycles may be giving us a clue.
Because it's possible,
it's possible now,
that our most technologically
advanced civilizations
had a knowledge
that was perpetuated
from one civilization.
And as it collapsed, remnants
became the next civilization.
And it collapsed.
Remnants became the
next civilization.
And in that way, we are looking
at a timeline and a heritage
of knowledge of the cosmos
and wisdom of us, who we are
and where we've come from.
Now I have to say
something here.
When people look at
this, the idea of cycles
and technologically
advanced civilizations,
two questions inevitably emerge.
What about Lemuria?
What about Atlantis?
I'm sharing what I know
to be true with you.
Through the language of
peer reviewed science,
as we know it today.
Now my personal
opinion, I believe
there were advanced
civilizations
before that may have been
called Lemuria and Atlantis.
And I think we're probably
finding evidence of that.
However, it is not yet
accepted by science.
It is not yet peer reviewed.
So I want to mention that.
And this is important
because in our next episode,
we'll take the
exploration of our past
back even further
in time to a time
when modern science tells
us that all that existed
were the microscopic
precursors of ancient amoeba.
The question is how do we
explain sophisticated artifacts
that we find linked to that
very same point in time,
to that same time in history?
And the growing body
of evidence that simply
does not fit the traditional
story of our past.
We're going to thank
you for joining me
for this program today.
And be sure to tune
in for our next
all new episode
of "Missing Links:
The Deep Truth of Our Origin,
History, Destiny, and Fate."
[THEME MUSIC]